Diabetes mellitus is an endocrinal disorder due to defective carbohydrate metabolism leading to higher levels of blood glucose(BG). Type I diabetes mellitus (DMT1) is caused by autoimmune destruction of insulin producing pancreatic beta cells leading to insulin deficiency. To maintain the optimal blood glucose levels, BG needs to be monitored several times a day so that dosage of exogenous insulin can be calculated adequately to avoid short term and long term complications. The Artificial Pancreas(AP)-closed loop mechanism involves the continuous blood glucose monitor feeding the data to an algorithm which calculates the insulin dosage for the insulin pump which releases the insulin to the body. It is designed to act as a replacement pancreas when pancreas start to fail. A robust BG prediction method would help in predicting episodes of hypo or hyperglycemia in advance, providing time to take preventive measures. The challenge in predicting BG are due to the sub-cutaneous route for BG measurement and insulin delivery and the delay associated, interpersonal variations, time dynamics and non linear pattern of BG levels.The algorithm acts as the bridge between the blood glucose monitoring system and the insulin pump. After receiving the current BG level, the algorithm combines it with other BG level contributing factors like previous BG levels, meal times, previous insulin dosage, exercise, sleep, stress etc. to come up with a required estimated BG level for reasonable time in future based on forecasted time-series BG level and thus calculate the necessary insulin dosage.Many studies have successfully used the AP system to control the BG level. (Steil, Rebrin, Darwin, Hariri, & Saad, 2006).  A study using Support Vector Regression(SVR) model supplemented by a physiological model and trained on patient specific data had found that the model outperformed experts at predicting BG (Plis, Bunescu, Marling, Shubrook, & Schwartz, 2014). Many studies used model predictive controller(MPC) approach in the algorithms.  One such study which used non-linear model with Bayesian parameter estimation to determine time-varying model parameters, found significant BG control during fasting conditions in subjects with T1DM (Hovorka et al., 2004).  A study with linear MPC with step response model also found potential use of predictive algorithms for BG control using an insulin infusion pump (Parker, Doyle, & Peppas, 1999). Another study used off-line system identification using neural network and non-linear predictive controller which found that stable control is achievable (Trajanoski & Wach, 1998). Similarly in a different study using artificial neural network, it was found that adequate dosage of short term and medium term insulin can be predicted to effectively control the BG level (El-Jabali, 2005). Some studies have also achieved positive results using model predictive controller on simulated patient data (Toffanin et al., 2013).  ####Bibliography:El-Jabali, A. K. (2005). Neural network modeling and control of type 1 diabetes mellitus. Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering, 27(2), 75–79. http://doi.org/10.1007/s00449-004-0363-3   
Hovorka, R., Canonico, V., Chassin, L. J., Haueter, U., Massi-Benedetti, M., Orsini Federici, M., … Wilinska, M. E. (2004). Nonlinear model predictive control of glucose concentration in subjects with type 1 diabetes. Physiological Measurement, 25(4), 905–920.
Parker, R. S., Doyle, F. J., & Peppas, N. A. (1999). A model-based algorithm for blood glucose control in type I diabetic patients. IEEE Transactions on Bio-Medical Engineering, 46(2), 148–157.
Plis, K., Bunescu, R., Marling, C., Shubrook, J., & Schwartz, F. (2014). A Machine Learning Approach to Predicting Blood Glucose Levels for Diabetes Management. In Workshops at the Twenty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Retrieved from http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/WS/AAAIW14/paper/view/8737
Steil, G. M., Rebrin, K., Darwin, C., Hariri, F., & Saad, M. F. (2006). Feasibility of automating insulin delivery for the treatment of type 1 diabetes. Diabetes, 55(12), 3344–3350. http://doi.org/10.2337/db06-0419
Toffanin, C., Messori, M., Di Palma, F., De Nicolao, G., Cobelli, C., & Magni, L. (2013). Artificial pancreas: model predictive control design from clinical experience. Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology, 7(6), 1470–1483.
Trajanoski, Z., & Wach, P. (1998). Neural predictive controller for insulin delivery using the subcutaneous route. IEEE Transactions on Bio-Medical Engineering, 45(9), 1122–1134. http://doi.org/10.1109/10.709556